_chapters/01-chapter.md, before:

---
title: "Project introduction & setup"
chapter_number: "01"
---

# Project introduction & setup

Your work begins much earlier than the moment you pick up a pen and paper.  Preparing for the first meeting with the client marks the actual beginning of a design process. By being prepared and *professional* during the first call, you start building a relationship. The reward for your professionalism will be big: the client’s trust in your decisions is at stake here.

Your work begins much earlier than the moment you pick up a pen and paper.  Preparing for the first meeting with the client marks the actual beginning of a design process. By being prepared and *professional* during the first call, you start building a relationship. The reward for your professionalism will be big: the client’s trust in your decisions is at stake here.

**In this section you can learn:**
- What questions to ask a client before and during the first meeting.
- Communication tips: how to talk to a client
- How to setup Google Drive/Invision asset folders
- Questions most frequently asked by clients

**Stakeholders**
- Client
- Designer(s)
- Business Development Representative
- Project Manager
- Developer(s)

## Kick-off meeting checklist:

### Before the first meeting with the client:

Together with the Project Manager, organize a meeting and gather all the project info. Ask the PM, BD and devs – don’t make the client answer the same question twice.
Things you need to know:

- Does the client have a working product?
    - If yes, consider a UX Review review first.
- Does the project have a clear scope?
    - Y/N (at this stage, the project should already have a scope; otherwise, you need to run a Scoping Session)
- Is the project idea ready to be turned into a design?
    - If you think that the project idea needs a review or a Product Design Sprint, check the procedures for other services.
- What platform will it be designed for?
- In the case of web design: will it be responsive?
- Will it be developed by our team?

### First meeting – explaining process to the client:
- **Educate the client**
    - Product design is a process. It never ends.
    - Design is about how things work, not only about how they look. Educate the client about your role and your expectations. Establish the boundaries and expectations at the beginning. Useful links:
        - What to expect from a designer
        - What are you paying for
        - Designer-client relationship
- **Avoid multi-platform designs at the early stages of the project**
    - If the client needs a multi-platform design, ask another designer for help. If you believe that the scope is really big, always suggest 2+ designers.

- **Emphasize that it’s impossible to accurately predict users’ behavior**
    - We rely on research and available data – the validity of a solution can only be assessed with relevant tests.
- **We cannot guarantee a business success**
    - Try to make it clear that even the best product design does not guarantee a product success in terms of revenue.
- **Give a quick overview of all the Product Design phases**

### First meeting – get some info from the client:
#### General info
- What is your deadline? (design/release date)
- What will make the application a success in your opinion?
- What will make our work a success in your eyes?
- Have you collected any user feedback yet?
- Can you grant us access to your analytics tools?
- Are there any similar products or alternative solutions to the same problem? What are your potential customers doing today instead of using your future product?

#### Questions specific to a Product Design Sprint (pick only relevant questions):
- What problem do you want to solve during the Product Design Sprint?
- What do you expect from the Product Design Sprint?
- What doesn't work in your product? What do you want to change? What's the most important part of your new feature?
- Do you have any solution on your mind?
- Do you have a basic scope of work in mind?
- What are your key assumptions? For example: end users behaving in a certain way, customers willing to pay for X, technology existing for Y?

#### Questions specific to UX Review:
- On the call, try to establish a scope of the review:
    - The narrower the better – a more focused scope is superior.
    - Try to get to know the client’s requirements and expectations for the review.
    - Try to get to know what user journeys are key to the client.
        - In a perfect scenario, narrow down the scope to just one.
- After the call, discuss the client’s requirements within the team and ask the team about possible blockers.

#### Visual:
- Do you have a branding, brand book, brand guidelines?
    - If not, give a heads-up about the importance of those in later phases .
- If the client wants to use corporate fonts in the UI, be sure they own a web/mobile licence.
- If you suggest an alternative paid font for the UI, be sure that the client is open to buying a licence.
- Does the client have any benchmarks or a visual style in mind?
- Does the client have source files for the old designs?

Make sure that all answers are documented and available for other (current and future) team members.

## Communication tips:
##### General rules:
- Be active, not passive – recommend solutions.
- Listen to the client’s expectations, don’t be afraid to ask questions.
- Consult your solutions with the developers from day one.
- Make sure you explain to the client how to use communication tools.
    - e.g. comments in InVision; explain the difference between tour-points and comments

##### Feedback
- Does the client have time to give you feedback?
    - If not, try to ask which active stakeholders can actively participate in communication.
- Make the client aware about the value of an active and collaborative approach (feedback, communication).
- Make sure that there is only one final point of feedback on the client’s part.
- Make sure that you will have an opportunity to present your solutions to all stakeholders.
- Make sure that the client knows that we don’t work on the basis of a fixed number of reviews but rather in a constant feedback-and-iteration mode.

## Another h2

Commit message:

Introduce quote, qa and dosndonts includes

_chapters/01-chapter.md, after:

---
title: "Project introduction & setup"
chapter_number: "01"
---

# Project introduction & setup

Your work begins much earlier than the moment you pick up a pen and paper.  Preparing for the first meeting with the client marks the actual beginning of a design process. By being prepared and *professional* during the first call, you start building a relationship. The reward for your professionalism will be big: the client’s trust in your decisions is at stake here.

Your work begins much earlier than the moment you pick up a pen and paper.  Preparing for the first meeting with the client marks the actual beginning of a design process. By being prepared and *professional* during the first call, you start building a relationship. The reward for your professionalism will be big: the client’s trust in your decisions is at stake here.

**In this section you can learn:**
- What questions to ask a client before and during the first meeting.
- Communication tips: how to talk to a client
- How to setup Google Drive/Invision asset folders
- Questions most frequently asked by clients

**Stakeholders**
- Client
- Designer(s)
- Business Development Representative
- Project Manager
- Developer(s)

{% include quote.html author="Adam Smith" text="Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet" %}
{% include qa.html question="Why do you want to know the business model?" answer="This will allow us some amount of lorem ipsum dolor sit amet conscetur blah blah" %}
{% include dosndonts.html dos="
Create your wireframes based on a muted color pallete
|Use color only if it helps defining the idea behind the design
" donts="
Don't use color in your wireframe designs unless it has a solid purpose
| Don't use various tints of grey
"%}

## Kick-off meeting checklist:

### Before the first meeting with the client:

Together with the Project Manager, organize a meeting and gather all the project info. Ask the PM, BD and devs – don’t make the client answer the same question twice.
Things you need to know:

- Does the client have a working product?
    - If yes, consider a UX Review review first.
- Does the project have a clear scope?
    - Y/N (at this stage, the project should already have a scope; otherwise, you need to run a Scoping Session)
- Is the project idea ready to be turned into a design?
    - If you think that the project idea needs a review or a Product Design Sprint, check the procedures for other services.
- What platform will it be designed for?
- In the case of web design: will it be responsive?
- Will it be developed by our team?

### First meeting – explaining process to the client:
- **Educate the client**
    - Product design is a process. It never ends.
    - Design is about how things work, not only about how they look. Educate the client about your role and your expectations. Establish the boundaries and expectations at the beginning. Useful links:
        - What to expect from a designer
        - What are you paying for
        - Designer-client relationship
- **Avoid multi-platform designs at the early stages of the project**
    - If the client needs a multi-platform design, ask another designer for help. If you believe that the scope is really big, always suggest 2+ designers.

- **Emphasize that it’s impossible to accurately predict users’ behavior**
    - We rely on research and available data – the validity of a solution can only be assessed with relevant tests.
- **We cannot guarantee a business success**
    - Try to make it clear that even the best product design does not guarantee a product success in terms of revenue.
- **Give a quick overview of all the Product Design phases**

### First meeting – get some info from the client:
#### General info
- What is your deadline? (design/release date)
- What will make the application a success in your opinion?
- What will make our work a success in your eyes?
- Have you collected any user feedback yet?
- Can you grant us access to your analytics tools?
- Are there any similar products or alternative solutions to the same problem? What are your potential customers doing today instead of using your future product?

#### Questions specific to a Product Design Sprint (pick only relevant questions):
- What problem do you want to solve during the Product Design Sprint?
- What do you expect from the Product Design Sprint?
- What doesn't work in your product? What do you want to change? What's the most important part of your new feature?
- Do you have any solution on your mind?
- Do you have a basic scope of work in mind?
- What are your key assumptions? For example: end users behaving in a certain way, customers willing to pay for X, technology existing for Y?

#### Questions specific to UX Review:
- On the call, try to establish a scope of the review:
    - The narrower the better – a more focused scope is superior.
    - Try to get to know the client’s requirements and expectations for the review.
    - Try to get to know what user journeys are key to the client.
        - In a perfect scenario, narrow down the scope to just one.
- After the call, discuss the client’s requirements within the team and ask the team about possible blockers.

#### Visual:
- Do you have a branding, brand book, brand guidelines?
    - If not, give a heads-up about the importance of those in later phases .
- If the client wants to use corporate fonts in the UI, be sure they own a web/mobile licence.
- If you suggest an alternative paid font for the UI, be sure that the client is open to buying a licence.
- Does the client have any benchmarks or a visual style in mind?
- Does the client have source files for the old designs?

Make sure that all answers are documented and available for other (current and future) team members.

## Communication tips:
##### General rules:
- Be active, not passive – recommend solutions.
- Listen to the client’s expectations, don’t be afraid to ask questions.
- Consult your solutions with the developers from day one.
- Make sure you explain to the client how to use communication tools.
    - e.g. comments in InVision; explain the difference between tour-points and comments

##### Feedback
- Does the client have time to give you feedback?
    - If not, try to ask which active stakeholders can actively participate in communication.
- Make the client aware about the value of an active and collaborative approach (feedback, communication).
- Make sure that there is only one final point of feedback on the client’s part.
- Make sure that you will have an opportunity to present your solutions to all stakeholders.
- Make sure that the client knows that we don’t work on the basis of a fixed number of reviews but rather in a constant feedback-and-iteration mode.

## Another h2
